Quick Click TIFF Reader=======================   This documentation is designed to be used from an ASCII text editor.  Use your editor's Find command to locate topics or keywords that interest you.   For the most part, this program is easy to use and easy for an experienced Apple IIGS user to understand.  Most people probably won't need this manual.  If you would like to quickly scan this documentation for unusual features, search for these keywords:*   TIP       Tips are just that.  They will save you time or highlight features an average Apple IIGS user might not expect.*   WARNING   Warnings point out things that could keep the program from working properly, or that might result in a loss of data or time if they are ignored.Table of Contents=================Legal StuffChapter 1 - Getting Started with Quick Click TIFF Reader   What's in This Book   System Requirements   Backing Up Quick Click TIFF Reader   Installing Quick Click TIFF Reader on a Hard Disk   Using Quick Click TIFF Reader With Floppy Disks   Using Quick Click TIFF Reader from a Network   Getting Answers to QuestionsChapter 2 - Quick Click TIFF Reader Command Reference   TIFF Reader Window Features      The Resize Tool      The Image Mover Tool   Apple Menu   About TIFF Reader   Desk Accessories   File Menu   Open...   Close   Save   Save As...      TIFF      Apple Preferred   Quit   Edit Menu   Undo   Cut   Copy   Paste   Clear   Tools Menu   Conversion Options...      Colors      Resizing      Dithering      % of Original Size      Offset: Horizontal      Offset: Vertical      Size: Horizontal      Size: Vertical   Contrast and Brightness...   Color Balance...Legal Stuff===========Written by:   Mike WesterfieldPublished by:   Byte Works, Inc.   8000 Wagon Mound Dr.  NW   Albuquerque, NM  87120   (505) 898-8183   MikeW50@AOL.COMCopyright 1995Byte Works, Inc.All Rights Reserved   Limited Warranty - Subject to the below stated limitations, Byte Works, Inc.  hereby warrants that the programs contained in this unit will load and run on the standard manufacturer's configuration for the computer listed for a period of ninety (90) days from date of purchase.  Except for such warranty, this product is supplied on an "as is" basis without warranty as to merchantability or its fitness for any particular purpose.  The limits of warranty extend only to the original purchaser.   Neither Byte Works, Inc. nor the authors of this program are liable or responsible to the purchaser and/or user for loss or damage caused, or alleged to be caused, directly or indirectly by this software and its attendant documentation, including (but not limited to) interruption of service, loss of business, or anticipatory profits.   To obtain the warranty offered, the enclosed purchaser registration card must be completed and returned to the Byte Works, Inc.  within ten (10) days of purchase.   Important Notice - This is a fully copyrighted work and as such is protected under copyright laws of the United States of America.  According to these laws, consumers of copywritten material may make copies for their personal use only.  Duplication for any purpose whatsoever would constitute infringement of copyright laws and the offender would be liable to civil damages of up to $50,000 in addition to actual damages, plus criminal penalties of up to one year imprisonment and/or a $10,000 file.   This product is sold for use on a single computer at a single location.  Contact the publisher for information regarding licensing for use at multiple-workstation or multiple-computer installations.Quick Click TIFF Reader is a trademark of the Byte Works, Inc.The Byte Works is a registered trademark of the Byte Works, Inc.Apple and GS/OS are registered trademarks of Apple Computer, Inc.Program, Documentation and DesignCopyright 1995The Byte Works, Inc.Apple Computer, Inc.  MAKES NO WARRANTIES, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, REGARDING THE ENCLOSED COMPUTER SOFTWARE PACKAGE, ITS MERCHANTABILITY OR ITS FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  THE EXCLUSION OF IMPLIED WARRANTIES IS NOT PERMITTED BY SOME STATES.  THE ABOVE EXCLUSION MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU.  THIS WARRANTY PROVIDES YOU WITH SPECIFIC LEGAL RIGHTS.  THERE MAY BE OTHER RIGHTS THAT YOU MAY HAVE WHICH VARY FROM STATE TO STATE.Chapter 1 - Getting Started with Quick Click TIFF Reader========================================================What's in This Book-------------------   Like most documentation that come with a program, this one serves three purposes.*   This documentation shows you how to install Quick Click TIFF Reader on your computer.*   This documentation shows you how to use Quick Click TIFF Reader.*   This documentation includes a reference section that is a catalog of all of the capabilities of Quick Click TIFF Reader.   This section gives you a quick overview of the documentation, as well as a detailed overview of this chapter.  If you read this section carefully, you'll learn what you can safely skip, and what you really need to read.  If you're an experienced computer user, you'll end up skipping a lot.   This book is divided into three major sections.*   This chapter tells you how to install Quick Click TIFF Reader and how to get help if you need it.*   Chapter 2 is the reference manual for Quick Click TIFF Reader.  This chapter describes the desktop interface, including all of the menu commands and the special mouse commands you can use in a TIFF window.  You'll also find tips on how to use TIFF Reader effectively; search for the word TIP.System Requirements-------------------Quick Click TIFF Reader runs on any Apple IIGS computer with 1.125M or more of RAM and at least one floppy disk drive.  It requires Apple's System 6.0.1 (not included).WARNING:   Quick Click TIFF Reader requires System Disk 6.0.1 or later.  If you have an older version of Apple's operating system, you will need to update your operating system.   If you don't have the latest System Disk, and would like to get a copy, check first with your local dealer, your user's group, and any online services you have access to.  You may be able to get a copy of the latest System Disks free.   You can purchase a System 6.0.1 boot disk or the complete collection of 6 System 6.0.1 disks and release notes from Byte Works.Backing Up Quick Click TIFF Reader----------------------------------   Quick Click TIFF Reader is shipped on a floppy disk.  Floppy disks are a very reliable way to store information, but accidents do happen.  If your floppy disk gets too hot, or gets too close to a magnet, the program might be partially erased--and if that happens, it needs to be re-recorded.  It's also possible you could loose a disk.   Of course, if you need to re-record a disk, you need to have more than one copy.  That's what backups are for.   We suggest making one backup copy of your Quick Click TIFF Reader disk.  You should also have a working copy, generally the one on your hard disk.   If you have a disk copy program you already know how to use, go ahead.  The Quick Click TIFF Reader disk is not copy protected, so you can copy it with any copy program.   Here's how to make a backup copy from the Finder.  The Finder is the program supplied by Apple Computer that shows disks, lets you copy files, and lets you run programs.*   Get into Apple's Finder.  One way to do that is to boot Apple's System Disk.*   Insert a blank floppy disk into the computer.  The Finder will ask you to initialize the disk.  Initialize it, using the default name of Untitled.*   Eject the disk by pulling down the Disk menu and selecting Eject.  The disk has to be selected before you can eject it.  If it doesn't eject, click one time on the disk icon to select the disk, then try again.*   Insert the Quick Click TIFF Reader disk into the disk drive.*   Drag the disk icon for the Quick Click TIFF Reader disk to the disk you just initialized.  The Finder will double-check before copying the disk, and will ask you to swap the disks a few times.  (Of course, if you have two 3.5 inch floppy disk drives, you can leave both disks in drives and avoid the swapping.)*   Click on the name of the new disk  Type the name of the disk you copied, since the name of the disk can be important.  Press the return key to finish naming the disk.*   Eject the new disk by dragging it to the trash can.*   Set the write-protect tab so the disk can't be accidentally erased, and store the disk in a safe place.Installing Quick Click TIFF Reader on a Hard Disk-------------------------------------------------   If you have a hard disk, you will want to install Quick Click TIFF Reader on your hard disk.  From the hard disk, Quick Click TIFF Reader will load and run faster, and will always be available when you need it.   To install Quick Click TIFF Reader on your hard disk, drag the file QCTIFFReader from the floppy disk to your hard disk.  You can also drag this documentation file, but it is not needed to execute the program.Using Quick Click TIFF Reader With Floppy Disks-----------------------------------------------   You can run Quick Click TIFF Reader from floppy disks by booting from a System 6.0.1 boot disk, then running Quick Click TIFF Reader from a copy of the Quick Click TIFF Reader disk.  If you have two 3.5" floppy disks, this works fairly well--by leaving the boot disk in your first drive and putting the Quick Click TIFF Reader disk in drive 2, you won't have to swap disks, and there will be some work space for your files on the Quick Click TIFF Reader disk.   If you only have one 3.5" floppy disk, Quick Click TIFF Reader will still work, but you will have to swap between the Quick Click TIFF Reader disk and the System Disk from time to time.Using Quick Click TIFF Reader from a Network--------------------------------------------   You can install Quick Click TIFF Reader on a network using the same procedure that installs Quick Click TIFF Reader on a hard disk.  Once installed, you can use Quick Click TIFF Reader just like you use any other program.   There is one thing you need to be aware of when using Quick Click TIFF Reader from a network:  Quick Click TIFF Reader requires System 6.0.1 or better.  If you are running an older version of Apple's system software, you will need to update your system software or boot from floppy disks.Getting Answers to Questions----------------------------   Eventually, you may want to talk with others about Quick Click TIFF Reader.   If you need technical assistance--anything from a bad disk to not understanding the manual to reporting a bug--you should contact the publisher and ask for technical assistance.  See the copyright information for ways to contact the publisher.   If you would like to talk to others about Quick Click TIFF Reader, we suggest one of the major online services, like GEnie.  You'll probably find a topic to discuss Quick Click TIFF Reader already there, and can join in the discussion.  As this manual goes to press, the publisher sponsors discussions on America Online and GEnie.  You can join the discussion on America Online using keyword ByteWorks.  From GEnie visit with us in topic 45 of A2.Chapter 2 - Quick Click TIFF Reader Command Reference=====================================================   This chapter describes the desktop interface used by Quick Click TIFF Reader.  Each of the menu commands is described and special commands and features of the TIFF Reader window are examined.   In several places, this documentation refers you to Apple's System Disk manuals.  These are the manuals that came with your computer.  The most recent version comes with Apple's System Disk 6.0.1, available from a variety of sources.TIFF Reader Window Features---------------------------   The TIFF Reader document window is a standard scrolling document window.  It supports two special tools which are nothing more than desktop shortcuts for the menu commands that allow you to resize or move a picture.The Resize Tool   The resize tool gives you a quick-and-dirty way to change the size of the image.  To get the resize tool, move the cursor over the image and hold down the option key.  The cursor switches to the resize tool.  Dragging on the image with the mouse changes its size.   The resize tool is a shortcut for the % of Original Size command in the Frame Options...  dialog.  See the description of that dialog for tips concerning resize options and speed.The Image Mover Tool   The image mover tool shows up when you move the cursor over the TIFF Reader document window and hold down the command key (the key with the open apple).  It's the ubiquitous hand shape, and like all hand shaped tools, it lets you drag the picture around the screen.   This tool is a shortcut for the offset commands in the Frame Options...  dialog.  See the description of the Frame Options...  command, later in this chapter, for some hints and comments regarding picture editing.Apple Menu----------About TIFF Reader-----------------   The about box shows the copyright notice and version number for Quick Click TIFF Reader.  The version number is something you need to check, especially if you are about to call for technical assistance with Quick Click TIFF Reader.Desk Accessories----------------   Any remaining items in this menu are desk accessories.  You can find a general description of desk accessories in Apple's System Disk manuals.  For specific information about a particular desk accessory, see the documentation that comes with the desk accessory.File Menu---------Open...-------   The Open command brings up an Apple open dialog.  Use this dialog to open an existing TIFF file.  The dialog's features are described in Apple's System Disk manual.   Quick Click TIFF Reader will inspect text files (file type $04), binary files (file type $06), and untyped files (file type $00) to see if they are TIFF files.  If you open a TIFF file that does not have a proper Apple IIGS file type, Quick Click TIFF Reader will present a warning dialog, asking if you want to fix the file type.  If you allow Quick Click TIFF Reader to fix the file type, it will be changed to an Apple IIGS TIFF file (file type $C0, auxiliary file type $0080).TIP:  The TIFF file format is very flexible, and has lots of options.  Quick Click TIFF Reader loads a subset of the vast number of formats that can be stored in TIFF files.  A TIFF file should be saved as uncompressed RGB if you want to load the file into Quick Click TIFF Reader.Close-----   This command closes the front window.  It works on all Quick Click TIFF Reader windows and most windows opened by desk accessories.Save----   Saves the contents of the front window.   See Save As... for some important notes about how files are saved.Save As...----------   This command brings up a slightly modified standard Apple save dialog.  The modifications are described below.  Apple's save dialog is described in Apple's System Disk manual.TIFFSelect this radio button to save the file as a TIFF file.TIP:  You could use this command simply to save the original file, but keep in mind that any changes you make are also saved.  One important use of Quick Click TIFF Reader is to change the size, color balance, contrast or brightness of a TIFF file that is destined for use in Quick Click Morph--in fact, that's what the program was originally designed to do.  All of these changes affect the output file.   One thing that does not affect the TIFF output file is the color conversion method you pick.  TIFF files are always saved as 24 bit uncompressed TIFF images, retaining all of the original color information.  Changes to the size, scaling, cropping, color balance, brightness and contrast all change the TIFF image, but the color conversion method and dithering do not.Apple PreferredSelect this radio button to save the image as an Apple Preferred image.  Apple Preferred images can be opened and used by most Apple IIGS programs that use pictures in any way.WARNING:  Some programs that support the Apple Preferred file format do not support multiple color palettes.  If the colors look noticeably worse in another program, it is likely that the other program does not support the color option you selected.  Try again with another color model.Quit----   This command leaves Quick Click TIFF Reader.  Before leaving, all windows are closed.  If any window has changed since it was last saved to disk (or since it was created, if it has never been saved to disk), you will get a chance to save the file, not save the file, or stop shutting down the program.Edit Menu---------Undo----   The Undo command is not used in Quick Click TIFF Reader.  It is included for use by desk accessories.Cut---   The Cut command is not used in Quick Click TIFF Reader.  It is included for use by desk accessories.Copy----   The Copy command is not used in Quick Click TIFF Reader.  It is included for use by desk accessories.Paste-----   The Paste command is not used in Quick Click TIFF Reader.  It is included for use by desk accessories.Clear-----   The Clear command is not used in Quick Click TIFF Reader.  It is included for use by desk accessories.Tools Menu----------Conversion Options...---------------------Brings up a frame options dialog.ColorsQuick Click TIFF Reader can convert 24 bit TIFF images to Apple IIGS images using a variety of color schemes.  The colors pop-up lets you select one of these color schemes.*   16 Grays uses a gray scale palette, more or less like a black and white TV.  This is a great option for pictures, especially if there are so many colors, or such delicate shading, that the original pictures just don't look right with any of the other options.  This choice also gives the fastest conversion from 24 bit to an Apple IIGS screen, so it is the default color for a newly opened TIFF file.TIP:  Since gray scale conversions are significantly faster than color conversions, convert your picture to gray scales before resizing or cropping the picture.*   Default 320 Palette uses the default colors from the 16 color 320 mode palette.  Use this option to save pictures programs that require the 320 mode palette.*   Default 640 Palette uses a color palette that approximates the 16 colors you can get by mixing colors in 640 mode.  This is the palette of choice for any picture you want to use in HyperStudio or any other 640 mode program, since it is also the color palette they normally work in.*   16 Custom Colors tells Quick Click TIFF Reader to form a custom color palette based on the actual colors in the TIFF image.   Combined with dithering, 16 Custom Colors is generally a good trade off between speed and color.  It gives pretty good color, but doesn't take near as much time as the 128 or 256 color modes.  This is also the proper choice for saving pictures for later use in programs that do not support multiple color palettes.*   128 Custom Colors and 256 Custom Colors give the most accurate color, although full color originals still require dithering, and delicate color changes are generally lost.  For both of these options, the image is mapped to either 8 or 16 scan lines of 16 colors each.  Half of the scan lines are optimized for dithering, and half for the most accurate color, then the color picker routines pick the best scan line for each display line.  (As a result, a particular picture may not actually use all of the available color palettes.)TIP:  Most of the time, you should use 256 colors rather than 128 colors.  One of the few cases when 128 colors works best is when you are creating key frames for Quick Click Morph.  See the documentation for Quick Click Morph for an explanation of when 128 and 256 colors work best.Resizing   Quick Click TIFF Reader can resize a frame using either this dialog or the resize tool.  This option controls the way pixels are formed when the frame is resized.   The Fast radio button selects a single pixel from the original frame for each pixel in the final frame, choosing the pixel that is geometrically closest in the two images.  In most cases, this gives good results, and the new image is formed very quickly no matter what size is used.   The Best radio button uses a much more precise algorithm to form the final pixels.  In effect, each of the final pixels is treated as a square, and overlaid on the original image, whose pixels are also treated as squares.  The final pixel's color is a weighted average of all of the pixels it overlaps in the original image.  This gives much better results, especially if the original image is a line drawing or has lots of sharp detail.  Unfortunately, this also takes a lot more time.WARNING:  To avoid incredible delays, the Best option will adjust the actual scale you specify by as much as 10% to get a more precise fit.  For example, a 51% reduction would be converted to a 50% reduction.NOTE:  See % of Original Size, below.Dithering   The Apple IIGS is limited to 16 colors on a scan line, while Quick Click TIFF Reader handles as many as 24 bits of true color per pixel.  With dithering turned off, each pixel in the final movie is picked from the closest available pixel in the Apple IIGS color palette.  In rare cases, this gives very good results, but on most pictures the color is horrible.   Dithering is a practical way to stretch the color palette.  With dithering on, a pixel is chosen based on it's true color, but then the difference in the true color and the actual color that was picked from the available colors is spread to adjacent pixels.  The color for the other pixels is modified slightly, so that pixel's color isn't quite right, but the overall color for large areas of the screen is closer to the original.   In many cases, the overall effect is far better than a frame formed without dithering.  Up close, the picture looks grainy, but from a distance, or when several frames are played in succession, the net effect is for your eye to blend the pixels together, so you see far more than the available 16 colors per line.   Dithering does take a fair amount of computer time, and for some pictures, the grainy result is worse than putting up with colors that are slightly off.  The best way to tell if dithering will work well is to try it.% of Original Size   This option resizes the image by a fixed percent.  100% leaves the image the original size, 50% cuts the image to half its original size, and so forth.   The original, unscaled image is held in memory.  This makes it safe for you to experiment--cutting the image to half its original size and then returning it to 100% doesn't loose any information.   See "Resizing," above, for comments on the quality of the final image and for information about the amount of time it takes to resize the image.TIP:  This dialog command is great for very precise resizing, but resizing an image is something people do better by feel than by numbers.  In most cases, it's easier to use the resize tool to change the size of an image.  See "The Resize Tool," earlier in this chapter, for information about the resize tool.Offset: HorizontalOffset: Vertical   These options shift the position of the image in the frame.  The position is shifted to the left and up by the number of pixels you enter.  The shifting is done before the image is resized.TIP:  This command is great for very precise positioning, but as with resizing, positioning an image is something people do better by feel than by numbers.  See "The Image Mover Tool," earlier in this chapter, for a visual way to move the image.Size: HorizontalSize: Vertical   These options give the size of the image in pixels.  Scaling the image changes the size automatically.  You can use this option to crop the image, rather than just resizing it.   To crop an image, eliminating all but a specific part, start by resizing the image.  Next, drag the image so the top left pixel you want to be in the final image is at the top left of the window.  Be sure the scroll bars are up and to the left when you do this step!  Finally, select the image size using these edit line items.TIP:  Nothing is lost when you crop the image.  All of the original information is still there, and you can recover it by shifting and resizing the picture.  When you save the image, though, either as a TIFF file or as an Apple Preferred image, the saved image only has the pixels you see in the window (or the ones you can see by scrolling).Contrast and Brightness...--------------------------   This command brings up a dialog with two controls.  Each is a paired scroll bar and edit line item; you can change brightness or contrast either by scrolling or by typing a value into the edit line box.   Brightness controls the overall saturation of a picture.  You can adjust the brightness from 0 (a completely black picture) to 100 (a completely white picture).  Generally, small changes work best.   Contrast changes the difference between different gray levels.  Lowering the contrast from the original value of 50 gives a washed out effect, while raising the contrast emphasizes differences in shading.TIP:  Play with these values all you want--the original image is maintained unchanged, and you can always get it back by setting both values to 50.  The changes only become permanent if you save the file.Color Balance...----------------   This command brings up a dialog with three controls.  Each is a paired scroll bar and edit line item; you can change a color level either by scrolling or by typing a value into the edit line box.   The three color levels let you control the brightness of each primary color individually.  Very small changes are generally best for retouching a slightly off-color image.  Large changes--such as lowering the green value to 0--give interesting special effects.TIP:  Play with these values all you want--the original image is maintained unchanged, and you can always get it back by setting all three values to 50.  The changes only become permanent if you save the file.